---
title: On The Dillinger Escape Plan
date: '2019-05-19T13:50:43.329Z'
---

The Dillinger Escape Plan (TDEP) are a special group, and I would like to
talk about why. I have probably listened to roughly 80% of their discography
and I was enraptured by their unique style that sought to undo many of the
comforts we have in conventional song-writing and musicianship.

Some years ago I was playing a video game called Bioshock in which you -- the
protagonist -- crash land in the middle of the ocean in the opening chapter.
The cause of your misfortune is not disclosed. The still floating, burning
wreckage that was your plane is slowly sinking and so you are encouraged to
alight. Into the nebulous ocean waters.

Fortunately a tower in the middle of the ocean is within swimming distance,
it is your only hope for survival. After dragging your apparently capable
self out of the ocean waters you enter the base of the tower. A banner
reading "No gods or kings. Only man." greets you. From here things get pretty
crazy. An elevator takes you to an undersea city where the brightest
scientific minds have created a safe haven for pushing the limits of what
humanity can achieve. Unfettered by scruples, all fronts of scientific
advancement have been pushed to dizzying heights. Humans have been augmented.
They can run faster, they are much stronger and they can shoot fire from
their finger-tips (because why not!?). Sub-human creatures act as enforcers
of an unspoken law. However, all is not well in Rapture.

Greed and narcissism have won out over nobler pursuits. Self-improvement and
self-glorification have enticed inhabitants of Rapture to set totalitarian
goals leaving many scraping the bottom of the barrel. Medicaments that
augment abilities are also highly addictive which fostered a group insanity
within the populace. Their dignity stripped as well as their pockets. This is
where you enter.

Cue the track "Fix your face" from TDEPs album "Ire Works"<sup>1</sup>.

Delving deeper still into the mysteries of Rapture I continued to listen to
TDEP. A better musical match for the peculiar horrors in this underworld is a
tall order. Like the denizens of rapture, TDEP is truly manic and
schizophrenic. Their track "Lurch", a song about a stalker reflecting on the
object of his desire is as creepy as it is frantic - "...your picture in my pocket I'm obsessed
with you".

Amidst this swirling chaos there are songs that are truly moments of quiet
clarity. None more so than, to my mind, the title track from "Dissociation".
Tracks like these invite a more reflective and personal mode, albeit
remaining true to the off-kilter sound TDEP work tirelessly to reproduce. A
combination of two drum tracks in the chorus drawing in and out of the left
and right sides of the stereo image create a sense of being in two states
simultaneously. Two-minds. Indecision. Ambiguity. Two narratives, not
intended to co-exist but somehow co-existing regardless. I have not heard a
better musical representation of these concepts which speaks to the maturity
TDEP achieved later in the bands career.

From a sound perspective, TDEP have opted for more barky, rock-sounding
guitars - with blazingly high gain to be sure. They are not a _metal band_ but
they are also not quite, only a _hardcore band_. They have created a specific
sound. All of these reasons are why TDEP are special and have become an
irreplaceable part of the kind of music I have come to love.

I leave you with a final recommendation to listen to the track "When Good
Dogs Do Bad Things" from "irony is a dead scene". It is one of my personal
favorites and an uncharacteristically long song for TDEP. It showcases their
dynamism while staying true to the narrative they would go on to develop.

R.I.P. TDEP.

### Notes

1. How is this from 2007?
